---
title: "The Paradox of Faith: Kierkegaard and Terrence Malick’s ‘A Hidden Life’"
author: "Amelia Deering"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: essays
cover: /assets/img/issue1/amelia/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/amelia/1
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">Franz Jägerstätter refuses to do what is required of him, brings shame
upon his family, provokes their persecution, and ultimately entirely
abandons them. He is also a devout Christian, and was beatified by the
Catholic Church in 2007. Watching Terrence Malick's <i>A Hidden Life</i>
(2019), we don't reproach Jägerstätter for his decisions. Instead, he
simultaneously amazes, perplexes and disconcerts us. He is a Christian
martyr much like Sir Thomas More in *A Man for All Seasons*, and yet his
name and story is largely unknown.<br></p>

Malick tells this forgotten story, and remains largely faithful to the
intricacies of Jägerstätter's life. In the film, Jägerstätter (August
Diehl) is an Austrian farmer who leads a simple, bucolic existence
working the land and raising his three young daughters with his wife
Fani (Valerie Pachner). With the advent of the Second World War and the
Nazi annexation of Austria, Jägerstätter is conscripted along with
fellow men from the small tight-knit community of St. Radegund. Of the
few people in history to resist swearing the compulsory oath of
allegiance to Hitler, Franz Jägerstätter is one of them. He withstands
the persistent pressure, dissuasion and aggression from his fellow
villagers and even the local ecclesiastical figures. Inevitably, he is
imprisoned, and he and Fani write letters to one another while he awaits
his trial. He is found guilty of treason and sentenced to death. Fani is
allowed to visit Jägerstätter, and he is given a final chance to sign
the oath. He does not waver, and is executed by guillotine in 1943, just
months after his initial act of defiance.

It is a relatively simple plot, but told beautifully. Various critics
have derided *A Hidden Life* for its apparently yawn-inducing length
(the film is just under 3 hours long), but I can't say that I agree. The
film bears a heavy philosophical weight, and the frequent scenes of the
Austrian landscape and general rural life serve as much-needed breathing
space. As a philosophy student, I hesitate to argue that any film is, or
can be, philosophy - but *A Hidden Life* definitely gets as close as is
possible. Perhaps the long running time is part of that; anyone who has
tried to read philosophy will know that reading just 10 pages can take
hours (I'm looking at you, Kant).

Regardless of how philosophers actually write, there is a general
consensus that philosophy ought to try, at least, to be concise and
clear. Terrence Malick has become infamous for his almost aggressively
non-linear and abstract style, but *A Hidden Life* is different.
Remarkably, the film has a chronological narrative structure and a
precise plot. No rogue cosmological depictions of the origin of the
universe. No inexplicable shots of characters wandering away with their
backs to the camera. That said, there are plenty of voice-overs and the
usual unshakeable devotion to wide-angle lenses (16mm was the longest
lens used). It is a Terrence Malick film, after all.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/amelia/2" ext="jpg" %}

The film's philosophical content draws on the traditions of theistic
existentialism, fideism and Christian morality. To explain what these
theories mean, I will turn to the figure that unites all three: Søren
Kierkegaard. Malick read the 19th Century Danish philosopher extensively
when he was a philosophy student, and these readings have, without a
doubt, left a life-long impression on him. Indeed, Malick even sneaks in
a quotation by him in the script's preface of *A Hidden Life*, which I
will return to later. Of his many notable writings, it is Kierkegaard's
discussion of faith and Abraham that serve as the visible theoretical
foundations for the film.

As the so-called 'father of existentialism', Kierkegaard emphasised the
absolute freedom of the individual - as given by God - to self-determine
in life. With absolute freedom, comes absolute responsibility. As
Jägerstätter profoundly asks a bishop, "If God gives us free will, we're
responsible for what we do, what we fail to do, aren't we?" The bishop
does not grant this: "You have a duty to the Fatherland, the Church
tells you so." Jägerstätter suspects that the bishop takes him for a
Nazi spy, and so perhaps decided to avoid running the risk of
persecution. By this point, news has already spread that the Nazis are
sending Catholic clergy members to concentration camps. Regardless, when
faced with extreme evil, are we really as free to self-determine as
usual? When his defence attorney presents him with the oath, he tells
Jägerstätter, "Sign the paper and you'll go free". "But I am free," he
replies. Freedom is absolute, an inalienable fact about the human
condition. Nevertheless, are we not compelled, morally, to condition our
behaviour in order to minimise the suffering of ourselves and those we
love? Rationally speaking, it would seem so. Religiously speaking, it
would depend.

According to fideism, faith is independent of reason. For Kierkegaard,
faith cannot and should not be rationalised or arrived at by
philosophical argument or evidence. Faith involves objective
uncertainty, but subjective certainty; faith is incomprehensible, but
not nonsense. A film that brilliantly captures this nuance is *A Man for
All Seasons*, especially during a specific conversation between Sir
Thomas More (Paul Scofield) and his daughter Meg (Marah Stohl). Meg
tries to persuade her imprisoned father to swear the Act of Succession,
to consent to Henry VIII's divorce from Catherine of Aragon, an act
wholly against More's Catholic faith.

> More: ...But look now, if we lived in a State where virtue was
> profitable, common sense would make us saintly. But since we see that
> avarice, anger, pride and stupidity commonly profit far beyond
> charity, modesty, justice and thought, perhaps we must stand fast a
> little, even at the risk of being heroes.

>Meg: But in reason! Haven't you done as much as God can reasonably want?

>More: Well, finally it isn't a matter of reason. Finally, it's a matter
>of love.

Jägerstätter is not as erudite nor as eloquent as More, but they both
possess this unconditional faith in God that is almost impossible to
comprehend for those around them.

In *Fear and Trembling*, Kierkegaard introduces another man of faith, or
rather, 'the father of faith' himself: Abraham. The book examines the
biblical story of God's test of Abraham, wherein Abraham is asked to
sacrifice his adored son Isaac. He neither hesitates nor questions, but
simply sets about to kill his son as instructed. Luckily, God intervenes
just as Abraham reaches for the knife, and Isaac's life is spared.

For Kierkegaard, Abraham's story shows the paradoxical, incomprehensible
nature of faith. Abraham is not a tragic hero, but either a
schizophrenic murderer or a man of faith. In trusting God, he acts 'on
the strength of the absurd.' In Kierkegaard's philosophy, there are
three stages to life: the aesthetic, the ethical and the religious. In
brief, the aesthetic is characterised by sensory experiences and
pleasures. With maturity, one transcends this stage to the ethical. This
involves living in accordance with higher 'ethical' principles and
rules. The superior stage, the religious, demands total faith in God.
Kierkegaard admits that for most people, including himself, the 'leap of
faith' from the ethical to the religious stage is too difficult a jump.
Abraham completes his leap through committing, unwaveringly, to
sacrificing his son as per God's orders. Indeed, it involves a
'teleological suspension of the ethical.' This is Kierkegaard's fancy
way of saying that Abraham has complete confidence in God's commands,
despite their ethically suspicious nature.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/amelia/3" ext="jpg" %}

Kierkegaard does not wish to say that all Christians live at this
superior stage of existence. In fact, he fiercely condemned the church
for 'playing at Christianity', and for contorting true faith into
something easily achievable. Going to church a lot, being sanctimonious,
evangelising, wearing a cross ≠ faith. Kierkegaard wanted to do away
with institutionalized Christianity and instead recognise the rarity of
genuine, true faith in God. In *A Hidden Life*, Ohlendorff (Johan
Leysen), a painter who is restoring the frescos in the village church,
admits he only paints "their comfortable Christ." He goes on: "We create
admirers. We do not create followers. Christ's life is a demand. We
don't want to be reminded of it." This subtle criticism of the church is
in truly Kierkegaardian fashion; being a churchgoer or identifying as
Christian and having true faith are not two sides to the same coin. True
faith in God and acting according to Christ's example, even if that
involves self-sacrifice and deep suffering, is intensely difficult.
Jägerstätter's character is so impressive *because* he is a genuine
follower, and not simply an admirer. He is, perhaps, to Terrence Malick
what Abraham was to Kierkegaard. In both depictions of Jägerstätter and
Abraham, there is a tangible tinge of reverence and awe.

Sir Thomas More, just like Jägerstätter, was eventually executed by
decapitation. As men of great faith, they became Christian martyrs.
Malick was deeply interested in the subject of martyrdom in writing *A
Hidden Life*. The Kierkegaard quotation mentioned earlier reads 'The
tyrant dies, and his rule is over; the martyr dies, and his rule
begins'. Only in dying can one become a martyr, and yet in acquiring
martyrdom, one becomes immortal. Christianity easily lends itself to
martyr-making; it is handily equipped with the concepts of salvation and
heaven, wherein a Christian is promised a place to live eternally with
God and their loved ones. Jägerstätter hopes for this future with his
wife and family. Fani, too, believes she will meet him again "through
God's grace." Death will not mark the end for Jägerstätter, as
symbolised by a black caterpillar, crawling along his desk as he writes
letters from prison. Just as a caterpillar transforms its body and
becomes a butterfly, when his body dies, his soul will live on in
heaven.

At the close of the film, Malick gives the following quotation from
George Eliot:

> \'For the growing good of the world is partly dependent on unhistoric
> acts; and that things are not so ill with you and me as they might
> have been, is half owing to the number who lived faithfully a hidden
> life, and rest in unvisited tombs.\'

The excerpt ties the film together nicely, contextualising the title and
focusing our eye on the subject of forgotten martyrs. But there is
another 'hidden' meaning in this too. The phrase 'a hidden life', both
as the chosen title and in George Eliot's words, is most likely
referring to a certain Bible verse. In the rather neglected book of
Colossians, Paul wrote, 'For you died, and your life is now hidden with
Christ in God' (3:3).

Although obscure, the quotation closely resembles Kierkegaard's
philosophy. Namely, to have faith in God, and to die with this faith, is
in some sense 'hidden' to those who lack this. Non-Christians and
pseudo-Christians can only see those with true faith behind a veil of
incomprehension. Jägerstätter's sister deems her brother's defiance as
"pride," and a neighbour calls it a "sin against his family...\[and\]
his village." Many try to persuade Jägerstätter round, insisting that
his behaviour is needless, pointless: "Your sacrifice would benefit no
one"; "Nobody would know." Yet Jägerstätter has faith in an all-seeing
God, from whom nothing can be hidden. No overt action nor covert thought
escapes God; Jägerstätter, along with every other human to exist, does
not and cannot lead a \'hidden life' from God.


<br>

_Sources/Further Reading_

>Kierkegaard, Søren. *Attack Upon Christendom*.

>Kierkegaard, Søren. *Either/Or.*

>Kierkegaard, Søren. *Fear and Trembling.*

>*New International Version Bible*. Colossians 3:3.

>Amesbury, Richard, \"Fideism\", *The Stanford Encyclopedia of
>Philosophy* (Fall 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

>McDonald, William, \"Søren Kierkegaard\", *The Stanford Encyclopedia of
>Philosophy* (Winter 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).
