---
title: "‘Kin Dza-Dza’: Retrospective Review"
author: "Sofia Stepanova"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: reviews
cover: /assets/img/bg/issue1/kindza
bgurl: /assets/img/bg/issue1/kindza
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">Throughout the majority of *Kin Dza-Dza*, half of the characters only
communicate by saying either "Koo" or "Kyu", and one of the two words is
a grave insult. This is a movie that smothers you with the illusory
comfort of nonsense, a sci-fi fantasy about aliens that use old
matchsticks as currency. The film was released in 1986, just a few years
before the collapse of the Soviet Union. For decades, citizens of the
USSR had lived under the safe predictability of communism for the
majority of their lifetimes. Now, the Iron Curtain was wobbling and a
chasm of uncertainty was opening. *Kin Dza-Dza* is a sceptical product
of its time, comedic but radiating with the anger and fear that plagued
many people during that time. The Soviet regime had a common language,
shared traditions and political ideals, and a place in the world that
they could point to and call home. *Kin Dza-Dza* puts the average Soviet
in an uncomfortable world where Yekaterinburg and Kuybyshev are only
made-up words that confuse the alien beings around them, where "East"
and "West" mean nothing. The plot revolves around the journey of two men
back home after being left stranded in a remote corner of the Universe
which they can't recognize. It is progressively more asphyxiating to
watch them struggle to find their path, not only geographically, but in
time.</p>

The majority of the film takes place in a deserted world whose
inhabitants live in underground "skyscrapers" and dress like Mad Max
extras. At the beginning of the film, the two protagonists stand on a
boundless stretch of desert. It is a familiar sight, so much so that
they begin listing all similar landscapes within the country to locate
themselves. There is a slight sense of normalcy to this planet for the
visitors. This extends to the alien creatures, which look like any
human, and they are often as uncaring, greedy and insensitive as us too.
There is a frightening scarcity of resources; no plants or water break
the bleak monotony of sand, this endless minimalist hellhole. However,
it is also an advanced society with flying"cars", teletransportation and
translation devices. Was this habitat always this barren, or this the
result of a cruel, technologically-advanced civilization allowing it to
rot?

This is not a grand tale of space colonialism or a sci-fi epic. The two
protagonists are not astronauts or soldiers, but rather lay people with
no intention of making the planet their own. The majority of the
planet's inhabitants work in factories, subservient to an all-mighty
overlord that issues strange commands like putting muzzles on people
from other planets on a whim. There is no joy in "defeating" anybody in
this film. The inhabitants fight over status symbols that do not enrich
their lives, and this cruel tug of war for useless possessions contrasts
the increasing desperation of two humans who just want to get home. But
even when the alien protagonists find themselves mistreating the humans,
they reveal a compassion that makes this movie's ending all the more
bittersweet. Perhaps our world is not too different from one where the
colour of one's pants determines their socioeconomic status. *Kin
Dza-Dza*, by being absurd, does not parody an imagined world. It
parodies ours.
