---
title: "No Winners, Only Losers: 'Parasite' Review"
author: "Sang Park"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: reviews
cover: /assets/img/issue1/sang/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/sang/1
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">It would be easy to label Bong Joon Ho's <i>Parasite</i> as just a mere
critique of today's society which enables and perpetuates an
unprecedented level of inequality. After all, inequality and social
mobility -- or lack thereof -- are issues that do not discriminate based
on nationality. Poverty and wealth coexist outside the tube stations of
London's upscale neighbourhoods and at the street food stands of Seoul
operated by downtrodden Koreans and enjoyed by a crowd blissfully
oblivious to their struggles. Perhaps, it is the prevalence and severity
of such issues portrayed in <i>Parasite</i> that have helped the film reach a
truly global audience.</p>

We are introduced to the Kims in the opening scene of the film. Living
in a squalid semi-basement apartment in Seoul, the family lacks access
to the internet despite living in a country that boasts the world's
fastest average internet speed. Their home is often urinated on from
above by drunkards, who see the Kims' house as nothing more than a
urinal in the concrete jungle of Seoul. However, with deception and
luck, Ki-woo, the Kim family son, followed by the rest of the Kims,
infiltrate the home of the wealthy Park family, through various roles.
Ki-woo serves as the English teacher to Da-hye, the Park family
daughter, while Ki-Taek, the Kim family patriarch (albeit only in
title), serves as the Park family driver and so on.

In Ki-woo's first visit to the Parks' gated house on top of a hill, he
walks in and looks up in awe at the modern house designed by a renowned
Korean architect. Unbeknownst to him, the woman who greets him at the
door is not Da-hye's mother but the live-in maid, Moon-gwang, a
privilege unimaginable to the Kims. What ensues is as Bong describes, "a
comedy without clowns, a tragedy without villains."

Rich bashing is a trope that has been explored by numerous films before
*Parasite*, and most likely will continue. However, *Parasite* is
different. Through the interactions between the Parks and the Kims,
Parasite shows us that its characters, despite their polar opposite
backgrounds, possess numerous indistinguishable traits. The rich and the
poor are both shockingly honest with their ulterior motives. The conmen
and their victims are both equally willing to employ deception, violence
and any other means necessary to meet their ends. Ultimately, the
cultured and the uncultured are both united by their lack of principles
and willingness to cross the lines.

Bong and co-writer Han Jin-won present the whole truth of each character
-- the good and the bad -- and force us to question whether the actions
of each party are justified and choose where our sympathies lie. Poverty
is not the holy water that absolves the sins of deceit and violence,
neither is culture a justification for discrimination against those who
lack culture. Thus, it complicates our loyalties. Once again, *Parasite*
invokes our moral calculus by not only pitting the wealthy and the poor
against each other, but also by its depiction of hostilities between
those who come from the same socioeconomic background.

The beauty of *Parasite* is that in order for our judgements of the
characters to be impartial and fair, we are forced to rely on the
context and periphery details that Bong provides. Both the Kims and the
maid's family were diligent -- albeit failed -- owners of King Castella
shop, a fast-food chain, which in Korea harks back to the 1998 IMF
crisis and symbolises the last stop on the journey to complete financial
ruin. From a briefly flashed medal, we glean that Chung-sook, the
matriarch of the Kim family, was once a successful athlete. From the
fatherly love that Dong-ik, the patriarch of the wealthy Park family,
shows towards his son, we understand that he is not like the
stereotypical ruthless millionaire. In fact, the flaws of *Parasite's*
loving, talented main characters are only put on display when their
livelihoods are threatened by others. Put shortly, their flaws stem from
today's brutal Darwinian society that rewards the heartless and
subjugates the compassionate.

While it may be the case that the prevalence of issues such as social
inequality and lack of social mobility propelled *Parasite* to
international acclaim, the film shows us how easy is it is for a person - regardless of their background - to give in to the temptations of
greed, and the price we pay as a society for our indifference towards
each other's suffering.
