---
title: "Glamorous Violence: ‘Once Upon a Time in Hollywood’ Review"
author: "Valentine Bridgeman"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: reviews
cover: /assets/img/bg/issue1/onceupon
bgurl: /assets/img/bg/issue1/onceupon
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">Once Upon a Time in Hollywood had all the ingredients to be a
near-perfect film. Yet, while the overall dish still tastes pretty good,
it can feel a bit like a great meal served lukewarm. I can't help but
get the sense that Tarantino was so confident in the appeal and intrigue
of this film that he didn't sell it to an audience as much as he should
have. </p>

Tarantino takes us to Hollywood, 1969, a paradise full of good looking
actors and actresses who dwell in luxurious homes in the hills, sipping
on Margaritas. Yet at the same time, there is the Hollywood we don't
normally see; hippies who eat out of bins in front of posters of the
cowboys they watch on tv, both desperate to emulate their swanky idols,
but also -- in a slyly self-referential way for Tarantino -- reviling
them for their popularisation of violence and out of touch lifestyles.
The relationship is mutual: actors shout "fucking hippies", but
filmmaker Sam Wanamaker desires his character be costumed "more
hippie-ish."

This world is intoxicating with an incredible production of Beverly
Hills palaces and Western sets, accompanied by beautiful panning shots
that roll over the luscious Hollywood landscape, revealing the dark
nooks and crannies hidden in the hills. A timely soundtrack plays
throughout; Paul Revere and The Raiders' "Good Thing" fans the audience
with nostalgia, but almost straight after, their song "Hungry"
accompanies the menacing shadow of Manson lurking outside Sharon Tate's
home on Cielo Drive. There are numerous brilliant stylistic pastiches of
Western films, advertisements, and other small nods that help set up
this strange, contradictory world.

Leonardo DiCaprio and Brad Pitt deliver stellar performances throughout
the film. Acting as the mediators between the aforementioned split
between the nicely-glazed image of Hollywood and the shadow behind it,
the two are effectively cast as inversions of themselves. DiCaprio's
Rick Dalton is a star with a house in the hills, but whose career is
headed nowhere fast. Pitt as Cliff Booth, on the other hand, does all
the wild things that movie stars do, like beating up people and making
dents in cars, or basking shirtless in the sun despite only being
Dalton's stunt man and part-time manservant. The performances require
the actors to constantly be two things at once: star and normal person,
normal person and star.

However, while the performances leave little for critique, the film
makes minimal effort to draw its viewers into Taratino's Hollywood,
meaning that if you're not interested at the beginning, you probably
won't be at the end. For example, an acquaintance with the actual
history of the Manson Murders is absolutely required, yet all the viewer
is told is that there's a creepy guy called Charlie. Moreover, Tarantino
overindulges in his stylisation of Hollywood; I found myself wondering
why I was watching so many long shots of car window screens, or why
Margot Robbie needed to be objectified as she walks around LA. With a
running time of 2 hours and 45 minutes, the film assumes the average
audience member will continue to be captivated by imagery that has very
little relevance to the already loosely defined plot.

Ultimately Tarantino's film would have framed the incredible
performances, visuals, and ideas in a much more satisfactory way if he
had thought of the audience more. But perhaps, in a film which
associates the idea of the normal audience with the crazed, influential
Manson Family, it's to be expected.
