---
title: "The Imprecise Beauty of ‘An Elephant Sitting Still’: Review"
author: "Sean Warmington"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: reviews
cover: /assets/img/issue1/sean/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/sean/1
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">The first shots of Hu Bo's mammoth <i>An Elephant Sitting Still (2018)</i>
begin with the central characters' first waking moments of the day. Each
of them sit up, in silence, as we see them slip into a mood of quiet
melancholy which envelops them until the film ends. This quiet is
shattered in Bu's flat, his drunken father shouting for his mother to
close the window to their cold high-rise flat, for the outside air is
carrying a foul smell. This is the world that Hu Bo's film exists in;
where windows must be kept shut to keep out the stench of the city but
can't keep out the depressive grey light; where the world exists only in
the immediate vicinity of the characters, the background rendered in
blur as if in a dream. There are no expansive, beautiful landscape shots
in this film, Hu Bo's cinematography rendering the details of setting
irrelevant with an oppressively shallow depth of field that focuses
sharply on faces but nothing else.</p>

The film follows four loosely related central characters over the course
of one day, their stories slowly converging as evening draws in. Yu
Cheng is an adulterous gangster, who first mentions the titular elephant
in the waking moments of the film. The elephant sits in a zoo in
Manzhouli -- a provincial city in Inner Mongolia on the border with
Russia -- where it bares all insults and attempts to move it with a
commanding and unaffected resolve. It's a romantic image, eventually
seducing each of the characters to embark on a pilgrimage to see it. Yu
Cheng's younger brother is the bully at a failing high school, where he
is pushed down a flight of stairs by Wei Bu who must then flee. One of
Bu's classmates and crush, Ling, is in a dispassionate affair with the
married vice-dean and is betrayed by her class-mates sharing a video of
them together on social media. She too must flee. The final and oldest
central character is Wang, a retiree forced out of the flat he owns and
shares with his son, daughter-in-law, and beloved granddaughter. The
four central characters' paths weave in and out of each other across the
course of this day, each drawn more and more to the powerful stoicism of
the mythical Manzhouli elephant.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/sean/2" ext="jpg" %}

This was director Hu's first and last film. He took his own life at the
age of 29, shortly after the film wrapped. While this film must be
viewed with this knowledge, to view it simply as a record of the
director's suffering or as some kind of note would be wrong. Ultimately,
this interplay between the hope-filled pilgrimage towards Manzhouli and
the stiflingly melancholic mood of Hu's cinematography evades this
characterisation.

In their interweaving storylines, each of the characters drifts through
the city in long unbroken shots, followed by Hu's Steadicam. The shallow
depth of field removes all background detail, their apathy felt through
our inability to make out their surroundings and the expressions of
those that they interact with. Other characters are mere blurs, their
emotions and motivations clouded from view, but their voices
disconcertedly piercing, aggressive and without compassion. Despite
powerful attempts, the central characters are frequently misheard or
misunderstood. In combination, these choices affect an overwhelming
feeling of dream-like alienation, compounded with the growing sense that
we are never quite sure of what we hear. Non-sequiturs and stark,
unexplained noises burst out at us; intermittent crackling explosions,
presumably firecrackers for Chinese New Year, are always heard but never
seen; the blur of a schoolboy in a corridor is unresponsive but to blurt
"the world is a wasteland" before vanishing, in perhaps a projection of
Bu's intrusive thoughts. In the film's only still shot, while the
characters play shuttlecock in the headlights of a coach, the sound of
an elephant's call pierces the silence in a haunting moment of
fantastical realism. Hu Bo's cinematography of imprecision allows for
these moments of uncertainty, leaving viewers with the uneasy feeling
that perhaps you cannot trust your thoughts or your senses. Whether we
hear that haunting cry as one of defiance, futility, or madness, this
devastating film of Hu Bo is a cry that cannot be unheard.
