---
title: "Retournez-toi: ‘Portrait of a Lady on Fire’ and the Lesbian Imaginary"
author: "Udoka Maya Okonkwo"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: essays
cover: /assets/img/issue1/udoka/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/udoka/1
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">What do lesbians dream of? Bread-making, Sappho and women with swords
feature heavily in the utopias of young women online. My own fantasy gay
agenda falls somewhere between <i>Pxssy Palace</i> and Mary Oliver; I yearn
for community and endless mornings, fog rising from the trees. I am
fortunate enough to live in a time and place where these dreams are
touchable, and am taken apart by memories of a time when they were not.
In <i>Portrait of a Lady on Fire</i>, director and wry French formalist,
Céline Sciamma, seems to dream in light. Every frame is filled with it.
Cinematographer Claire Mathon manipulates it obsessively, ignoring
realism in favour of the magic of flushed skin and illuminated
domesticity. <i>Portrait</i> is a departure for Sciamma, who has shifted
settings from contemporary France for her coming-of-age trilogy, to an
isolated island in late eighteenth-century Brittany.</p>

Noemie Merlant plays Marianne, an artist inspired by figures such as
Artemisia Gentileschi or Angelica Kauffman[^1]. She has been
commissioned to paint the wedding portrait of an aristocratic woman
(Adèle Haenel) due to be married to a Milanese nobleman. Her return from
the convent is precipated by the implied suicide of her older sister to
escape this fate, and Héloïse's resistance to the marriage takes the
form of a refusal to be painted. Marianne pretends to be her walking
companion to paint her in secret, memorising Héloïse's features for
nightly painting sessions. Sciamma combines the languages of painting
and cinema with a confident deftness of hand. The film's tone is quiet,
focused, yet expansive. Her characters stand at the sea, trapped by its
waves even as the physical barrier frees them from the male-dominated
world. At the edge of Héloïse's world, the sky sits on her shoulders.
Creating fictional characters sketched against the historical presence
of women painters, Sciamma dodges the temptation to depict the
individualised woman triumphing against the odds as part of a grand arc
towards 'empowerment'.

There is no conflict stemming from Marianne's initial lie. When the
artist confesses her deception, Héloïse is unperturbed; "It explains all
your looks." Sciamma denies us the false catharsis of a met expectation,
instead steering us towards the erotic potential of equality. The rhythm
of the film is the shot/reverse-shot structure writ large. Any
expectation that Héloïse will be the woman-child liberated by Marianne
is trashed early on. Héloïse matches Marianne's dark-eyed observations
with an almost physical intensity to her gaze (if lesbianism has
sacraments, Adèle Haenel's face is surely one of them). When Marianne
notes that she'd hate to switch places with Héloïse, she reacts to the
note of pity with incredulity --- «Nous sommes dans la même place.
Exactement la même place.» ("We are in the same place. Exactly the same
place,") before describing Marianne's traits with the accuracy of an old
master.[^2]

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/udoka/2" ext="jpg" %}

The first eerily incomplete wedding portrait highlights the sinister
potential of the nonreciprocal gaze. The painted wife flattens the
humanity of the woman that will occupy that space. The eighteenth
century wedding portrait acted as a mould for women under
heteronormativity; the image became a literal part of the home,
reproducing itself in the limited subjectivity of its sitter. Celine
Sciamma borrows the language of horror to represent this --- visions of
Héloïse, silent and swathed in white, haunt Marianne like Gothic
nightmares.

Much has been made of the female gaze in relation to lesbian film,
though the term escapes easy categorisation. It is easiest to define it
by what it is not --- it doesn't objectify or control, and is anathema
to the violent disregard of the male gaze which has dominated cinema
since its inception. One could also describe the female gaze as a
different form of relationship. In undoing the distinction between muse
and painter, *Portrait* turns on the power of openness and reciprocity.
This ethos is central to the film. Sciamma wrote Héloïse for Adèle
Haenel; the film's plot has echoes of the romantic relationship they
once shared and their fruitful creative partnership. "In our studio,"
Sciamma states, "there is no muse: there are just two collaborators who
inspire each other." Described thus, it is clear that the female gaze
need not be especially female at all.

It is difficult to pinpoint when Marianne's looks move from observation
to adoration. Maybe it is about the same time that Héloïse's face ceases
to be a mask, with her flashing eyes and loaded looks betraying emotions
that run deep. The identity of the lady on fire is subverted. As
Marianne gives Héloïse her first experience of secular music through her
halting rendition of Vivaldi's 'Summer', the fireplace flickers above
her shoulder. The first woman to be set alight is her.

As a lesbian child, I grew up terrified of my eyes betraying me. I
thought a visiting preacher could see through them to the thoughts in my
heart, and only ever looked at crushes slightly askew, as if the sheer
existence of my desire could leave a mark. Looking up to see my longing
reflected in the eyes of women like me felt revolutionary. The lovers'
swirling desire reaches its peak at the height of this feeling. The
sequence at the bonfire has the feel of the chthonic, ancient melodies
seemingly rising from the earth before we see the choir of women come
into focus. "Fugere non possum", they sing --- *We cannot flee*. Héloïse
and Marianne smile at each other for the first time, across flame.
Héloïse catches fire, but they *both* succumb to the world-shaking
implications of being truly seen.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/udoka/3" ext="jpg" %}

In an interview with [robertebert.com](robertebert.com), Sciamma describes *Portrait* as a
specifically "lesbian imaginary." Why, as a friend asked upon my coming
out to her, doesn't queer suffice? This is a question rarely asked of
gay men. The avoidance of the word underscores its radicalism; there is
no space for men here. According to French theorist and author Monique
Wittig, the lesbian is abjectly unassimilable, linguistically impossible
--- "there is a semantic hole into which the word 'lesbian' disappears."
Wo/men without men are impossible subjects, forced to choose between
lesbian life or continual restructuring of the conditions of their
existence in order to make room for themselves. Witting struck language
and myth asunder, rewriting the Orphic story to gift Eurydice the
radicalism of her love:

> ***"Only there... do you turn to face m/e with a bound and it is true
> that looking into your eyes I revive with prodigious speed."***

The lesbian is dangerous, an escapee from the patriarchy, illegible to
its attempts to tame women through heterosexual domesticity. Perhaps
that is why film has been so cruel to us, punishing us with unhappy
endings. Like an unfinished wedding portrait, we represent the
possibility of freedom.

The conception of lesbianism as narrow and exclusionary bears no
resemblance to our lives. To paraphrase Toni Morrison, lesbianism is an
endlessly rich place to write from, and has always been constituted by
and with an orientation to the world. In 'Uses of the Erotic,' Audre
Lorde describes a lesbianism that expands beyond its definition as just
sexual attraction. This, she argues, is a conflation of the pornographic
with the erotic --- sexuality isn't limited to "genital excitement"
(thank you Miriam Margoyles), but a wider system of acts and beliefs
that form the basis of 'worlds'. To Lorde, lesbianism exists on a
continuum of feeling, with love, sorority, friendship, motherhood, and
sexual desire all rich with the potential of female connection.

And here we find Sophie. Where Héloïse and Marianne's charged looks hold
the film's art, Luàna Bajrami's seventeen-year-old maid holds its
philosophy. A lesser film would make the maid figure a mere accessory to
conflict --- a voiceless, oppressive presence used to remind the viewer
of the impossibility of lesbian love, limited to listening at doors and
interpreting the grander love story through floorboards. Instead,
Héloïse and Marianne spend a large part of the movie as part of a small
band of women, united in their desire to help Sophie abort an unwanted
pregnancy. Despite not being a lesbian, Sophie is not excluded from this
imaginary. This dreamscape is non-essentialist --- not naturally
emanating from lesbian persons, but rather "acts, moments,
relationships" that occur in a non-male-centric space. Barriers break
down in sorority. One tableau sees Héloïse (ostensibly the mistress of
the house) cooking, the maid creating art, and the artist observing her
embroidery with admiration. Even the comtesse is included --- though she
"represents domination," she is never reduced to a stereotype. Women
aged fifty and older watch more films than any other demographic, and
Sciamma gives them the dignity of laughter, love and grief.

Sophie's abortion is the high point of Sciamma's manifesto. Sophie lies
on the bed in the small room, the discomfort on her face highlighted by
fire and sun. Forced almost atop one another in the tiny space, a baby
caresses her face during the procedure, consoling her. Free to choose
her future, she is surrounded by friends. Misogynistic, classist
narratives that sunder us apart from one another --- mother from
abortionist, woman from desire --- are dissolved in the radical reality
of our lives. Marianne is the woman straddling worlds, yet Héloïse must
ask her to look. "Remember this", she seems to say, restaging the scene
that evening. Paint.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/udoka/4" ext="jpg" %}

***"Do all lovers feel like they're inventing something?"***

Art and love are intertwined, as mutually constitutive processes. In an
interview with *The Independent*, Sciamma states that "love educates us
about art. Art consoles us from lost love." We learn that the
commonplace yet hidden parts of our lives are worthy of depiction, as
the lovers call each other into better art and deeper love for the women
around them.

The sudden presence of a man heralds the beginning of an end,
punctuating the peace like a jump scare. The women settle into their
correct places. The new painting, so vital and arresting, is sealed
away. The wedding dress of Marianne's nightmares envelopes Héloïse. The
painter flees the encroaching heterosexuality only to be fixed in place
by her loves' frantic «Retournez-toi!» ("Turn around!"). Eurydice claims
her position in her own memory. The temporality of the film embraces the
ecstasy of present love and the inexorable pull of its memory, layering
them from the very beginning. Céline Sciamma has given the lesbians of
times past their voices once more. We have learned to speak their
language. With Héloïse, we remember.

I am in Florence, picking a path through the shuffling crowds of the
Uffizi Gallery. Fifteenth century ceiling frescoes and twists of marble
give way to blood red walls as I descend into Room 90. Here, Caravaggio
draws the bigger crowds --- a group of straight couples peck at each
other under Bacchus' languorous gaze. But he isn't why I'm here. I feel
Gentileschi's Judith before I see her. I cannot insert myself into the
narrative here; there is nothing spare, only focused, desperate energy
with all the weight of damnation. Strong arms honed by housework force
flesh and blade together, and her face, classically beautiful in the
apocryphal tale, is too contorted by exertion to evoke anything but holy
terror.

There is one key difference between this Judith and the others in these
ancient corridors. Judith does not wrangle this beast alone. Behind her,
imbricated in this gore, stands another woman. A serving woman perhaps,
or a friend. Her identity may not be known to us, but what is clear is
that Holofernes' death is not an act of individual creation. They work
together.

The scuffle of a dozen small trainers behind me, and the moment is
broken. I turn and smile to have my picture taken. Amongst the
schoolboys, there is another woman here, watching me watching the
painting. She takes in Gentileschi's gore, my buzzcut and combat boots,
then waggles her eyebrows at me. We look, across language and art and
time.

*Works cited:*

>Ginzberg, Ruth. 1992. Audre Lorde\'s (Nonessentialist) Lesbian Eros.
>*Hypatia*, 7:4, Lesbian Philosophy (Autumn, 1992), pp. 73-90.

>Lorde, Audre. 1984. Uses of the erotic: the erotic as power.

>Telfer, Tori. 2018. How Do We Define the Female Gaze in 2018? *Vulture*,
>August 2 2018.

>Wittig, Monique. 1975. The Lesbian Body.

---

[^1]: Extraordinary painters working in the seventeenth and eighteenth
    centuries respectively. I recommend Kauffman's *Self-portrait by the
    artist between music and painting* (1794) for an introduction to her
    work.

[^2]: I know that they don't have sex at this point, but is this
    possibly the best lesbian sex scene ever? *Blue is the Warmest
    Colour* found dead in Paris.
