---
title: "‘The Farewell,’ Diaspora Experiences, and the Culture of Chinese (Non)Communication"
author: "Xinyi Wang"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: essays
cover: /assets/img/issue1/xin/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/xin/1
---

<div class="text" style="background-color: black;padding-top: 35px;padding-bottom: 15px;">
            <p class="first" style="font-family: 'Eldorado Text', serif; font-size: 36px; line-height: 1.2; color: white;">My grandfather died four years before I was born. It was cancer, and it only took a few months. That was how I always knew him; my mother never thought death to be a taboo subject, and had told me nonchalantly about her father’s passing since
                I was a young child. It was until recently, when I excitedly told my mother about&nbsp;<em>The Farewell</em>’s existence, that she told me another side to the story of his death.&nbsp;<br></p>
        </div>
		

<p id="first-paragraph" style="padding-top: 2rem;">“His mother never knew,” she said. He died in his fifties, at least a decade before my great grandmother did. The family decided not to tell her, in respect and fear that it would break her heart and she would die of grief. His death was a
                secret the family carried to her grave. Whenever she’d ask for him, they’d say that he was busy, or out of town visiting my mother. After years of deflection, we realized it was too late to go back; the delayed news would have hurt her
                even more than told on time, and we didn’t want to&nbsp; think about the consequences. <br></p>

While not solely restricted to Chinese families, this is the reality of
an all-too familiar Chinese experience; to keep secrets from each other
under the guise of protection and filial piety, especially in the face
of grief. Carrying our own burdens and secrets, we are only bearers of
good news. "The Chinese have a saying: when you get cancer, you die. Not
because of the cancer, but because of the fear." This line from *The
Farewell* contains a certain wisdom that fuels the premise of Lulu
Wang's bittersweet film: that death is about perspective. You could
either live out happily planning your grandson's (fake) wedding,
reunited with the ones you love, or you could die worrying every day is
your last. So why make it such a big deal? The catch is that this
perspective is not held by all, but rather chosen for Nainai by Billi's
(Awkwafina) family.

We all should have a right to know about our own health -- to the
Western mind especially, this autonomy is common sense. The thought of
the familial collective deciding what is best for you seems, to some,
absurd, and to others, a problematic case of control and secrecy.
However, I cannot dismiss this aspect of non-communication as yet
another black-and-white flaw ingrained in our cultural behaviour; this
is a topic I approach with conflicting feelings, growing tired of the
East set against the 'normalcy' of the West. Especially in films made
for American audiences showing how strange and self-sabotaging the
traditionalists are (See: Crazy Rich Asians). Sitting down for *The
Farewell*, it was heartwarming to see her handle this manifestation of
non-communication so delicately, no longer choosing one culture over the
other, but rather highlighting the nuances we face when it comes to
internalised conflicts over cultural behaviour.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/xin/2" ext="jpg" %}

A critic, after describing the film as having an "absurd premise",
received criticism for his ignorance and narrow world view. He deserved
the backlash he received, but I do think the theme of absurdity
nonetheless exists in the film. The film opens with a perspective that
is comfortable for a primary Western audience so that they can easily
identify with Billi. The situation plays up absurdity: shots of our cast
front-facing the camera with uniform inexplicable expressions recurs
throughout the film (and poster), and the blue-trenched, minimalist and
brutalist photography of Chinese scenes reflect a clinical depiction of
the country. The matter-of-fact acceptance of the situation from her
family is even played as Kafkaesque, accompanied with short, simple
dialogue as Billi observes this foreign world she is placed in. It is
clear that we are transported into the world of the Oriental other, and
this treatment of Chinese culture from American cinema is hardly unique
or special.

As the film goes on, Billi crosses over to even actively hide the
reality from Nainai at *The Farewell*'s emotional height. The brutalist
buildings began to carry an amicable presence, and we witness small
contained moments of humour and love during Chinese day-to-day life.
Knowing the premise and expecting myself to cry bundles of tears, I
instead found myself laughing at the relatable cultural markers. In one
particularly notable scene, the family visits Yeye (Grandpa)'s grave,
and the sons light up a cigarette as an offering that is quickly
disputed over -- "Don't give him that, he quit". "He lied, he never
quit." While Nainai's insistence on bowing after every rather trivial
wish is another portrayal of the absurd, it felt more like an in-joke
about the elders and filial piety than another showcase of a strange
Orient. Moments like this subvert the expectations of the film's primary
Western audience, slowly easing them into a culture that is not theirs
but no longer an 'other'. It rejects any sort of melodrama that could
feed into a more stereotypical tale of a lie-gone-wrong, as this is
simply the reality many find themselves in.

Billi's journey is ultimately a process of coming to terms with her
roots, with understanding why these secrets are so complicatedly kept,
and accepting their emotional weight. The distinctive second-generation
diaspora perspective -- which is Wang's own, with the film being
autobiographical -- was crucial in maintaining a nuanced perspective. In
the scene where her parents argue with relatives over being Chinese or
American -- reiterating the American Dream -- Billi interjects by
pointing out that America has many issues of its own. The patriotic
optimism found in first generation migrants is diminished by the second,
and with it, a change in attitude towards these cultural conflicts and
questions of "what is the right thing to do."

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/xin/3" ext="jpg" %}

Diasporic identities are complex; the merging of cultures does not
always go smoothly, and accepting your own hybridity is never easy.
Watching Wang's's story unfold is fascinating, her cultural conflicts
resonating with me as she brings out a familiar repression of negative
emotions, the recognisable problem in communicating love and care, and
the familiar struggle of homecoming. I wish that these familiarities
were not present in my experiences or culture, but they are, and *The
Farewell* is a beautiful and quiet cinematic reflection that captures
the crossroads of diasporic unease , unconditional love for your family
and culture, and the messy reconciliation that follows.

My grandfather's story represents only one of many complicated white
lies within my own family history. As long as death and dying remain
taboo subjects, the choice between repression or communication will
persist. My mother ultimately regretted our family's choice and we
collectively agreed to communicate more openly, to stop hiding major
family events for each other's "own good." She felt that great-grandma
probably had a hunch -- in *The Farewell*, Wang implies Nainai did too.
However, I believe both women would have understood the reasons for the
lie and forgiven our families for it; if forgiveness was even a
question. Watching Nainai, Wang's real grandmother, exercising at the
end of the film -- healthily, blossoming in happiness -- I am grateful
that a little movie like this exists. *The Farewell* tells, without
judgement, the story of how and why our lies and secrets come to be, and
prompts similar stories to finally be unearthed.
