---
title: "The Era of Climate Change Cinema"
author: "Kirese Narinesingh"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: essays
cover: /assets/img/issue1/kirese/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/kirese/1
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">At first glance, climate change does not seem as relevant to cinema as
the themes of love, war, and even horror. Is it possible to insert
climate change as a theme, or even a genre, into cinema as we know it?
This "cinema as we know it" is, by its nature, fluid. Cinema demands
change and change is a facet (and asset) of cinema. With this in mind,
we must ask whether climate change as depicted in films suggests that
cinema is entering into a new era. Maybe it's apt to reflect on whether
we see science-fiction as a medium that both reflects our anxieties and
protects us from the bleak reality that may be closer than we think.
It's not for now, in our present states of mind, what "will be" but what
"*may be"*, and the movies show exactly that.</p>

Cinema is fickle. Westerns, once popular with mid-twentieth century
audiences, are hardly made or even taken notice of in our present time.
So too has the musical suffered after its boom in the latter century,
and the silent film is, of course, also invisible. Action films are
entertaining "roller-coaster rides" that attract billions of dollars,
but how long will that last? Films are moments in time, transitory
glances at what is, once was, and what will be.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/kirese/2" ext="jpg" %}

Climate change, on the other hand, is a different beast. It's not hard
to notice that climate-change cinema is deeply rooted in science-fiction
films. *Blade Runner* (1982) with its nightmarish, post-modern Los
Angeles of 2019 is a frenzy of violent energy, depicting industrial
pollution that goes hand in hand with human advancements in machinery
and architecture. It's not surprising that the director, Ridley Scott,
was inspired by Fritz Lang's *Metropolis* (1927). I wonder, then, if
this was the starting point of "climate change cinema"? *Metropolis'*
"big city" spectacles of skyscrapers, capitalistic incongruities between
workers and enterprise owners highlighted the inequalities of its time,
but also inadvertently created a domino effect, whereby science-fiction
films like *Blade Runner,* *The Day after Tomorrow* and *Avatar* reflect
the same preoccupations about industrial-based destruction of humanity
and its environment. Just as *Black Mirror* reflects near-future events,
so too does science-fiction shapeshift into representations of the
growing potentiality for climate catastrophes. Pessimism bursts through
films of our present day: doom and gloom are inevitable circumstances in
films like Bong Joon-ho's *Snowpiercer* (2013)*,* in which efforts to
resolve global warming backfire and lead to social crises; Alfonso
Cuarón's *Children of Men* relies on ambiguous tension, positing
infertility as an apocalyptic crisis.

These are all films of speculation. Whether or not there are films
nowadays that truly depict the *present* is questionable. At least, none
come to mind. Undoubtedly, like in the films mentioned above, climate
change is the causal element of the social issues of the dystopian
realities. Notably, these fictional stories always portray the
after-effects of devastation, instead of a world *becoming* devastated,
which is the world of today. For instance, In *Avatar,* in an era of
post-devastation, humans resort to the colonization of other planets for
resources, whereas in *Blade Runner,* the effects of climate change are
reflected in its Los Angeles mise-en-scène that exudes the paradoxical
blend of the aesthetically pleasing, colorful lighting and the noxious
pollution and decay that swarms the city, as a protective shield. Like
the characters of *Blade Runner,* we, too, are surrounded by a layering
shield and protected from reality. The cinema is our protective cover
and blindfold. Climate change is represented as more of a looming shadow
in fictional cinema. It's essentially a type of boogeyman that we must
fear, but, as it turns out, we never believe that it is actually real.
The catastrophic events of *The Day After Tomorrow* or the "boogeyman"
technological dangers of *Black Mirror* are frankly entertaining- not to
be taken too seriously. There is little power in expounding on the
hypothetical, especially when it is so distractingly beautiful, as in
*Blade Runner*, or any of those shows.

{% include pictureart.html img="/assets/img/issue1/kirese/3" ext="jpg" %}

Significantly, however, these films do not blame anyone but humanity
itself as the central causal destructive force that propels its own
environment into complete decimation. It's explicit in films like
*Annihilation* (2018)*,* which uses cancer to symbolize the tumorous,
malignant and instinctive power of humans to self-annihilate. Even
*Avengers: Endgame* references the silver lining of humanity's
destruction. In one scene, Captain America takes note that he sees more
animal life in the Hudson River, as if to suggest that our destruction
implicitly corresponds to the creation and preservation of other species
on our planet.It is not an outside, extra-terrestrial event that
threatens the balance of human power; it's us. The cinema of science
fiction thus seems to be pigeon-holed in futuristic reality. Granted, it
is what it has always represented. However, given the surge of recent
climate phenomena, film must open its boundaries and defy genre. Climate
change should not be confined to science fiction, nor should it be
trapped within the temporality of the near-future or the hypothetical.
As *Annihilation* suggests, in order to create a new world, we must
efface the old; to create a new cinema of climate change, we must
destroy the rigidity of generic boundaries that categorize climate
change phenomena in the bracket of science-fiction.

Documentaries may be a more fruitful approach at analyzing the potential
for "climate change cinema" (however we define that ). *Planet Earth*
and *Our Planet* provide the most piercing and insightful glimpses into
planetary devastation. They're hard to watch,tearing down beauty in
frightful images of negation. Shows such as these make us interrogate
the present as a growing devastation of our surroundings, a darkness
slowly covering the entire earth. Whether there is transformative power
in such an approach of demonstrating horrific, non-fictional events is
debatable. The filmic reality is nonetheless a heightened reality and
subconsciously, we believe that the on-screen illusions bear little
resemblance to the outside world. Documentaries are meant to break
through illusion and create stories from this intrusion into an "other"
reality or world that is seemingly inaccessible to the average human.
Therefore they ostensibly portray "what is" and consequently, "will be."
*Planet Earth* and *Our Planet* are made to be "intrusions" or a
veritable 21^st^ century Brechtian V-effect, a startling shock that's
meant to reverberate down the spine and stimulate action. It's puzzling
that we are so affected by real images in the fleeting moments of
watching a film. It's even more puzzling that the V-effect has been
crippled into only reaching the first stage of shock, with reflection
and action are substituted by indolence and inaction. It begs the
question whether images of catastrophe are rendered so banal that we can
no longer be affected by them, and whether we are so trapped in
artificiality and hypothesis that we can no longer recognize illusion
from reality.

Within cinema lies the speculation of whether there can be a "right"
approach to portraying a climate crisis. Can pessimism be effective, or
would it be more useful to promote films which end on a note of renewal,
such as *Interstellar*? Or, it may be too late. Admittedly, this article
verges on pessimism and can be accused of being as speculative as the
films it critiques. However, I do not want to be pessimistic and nor do
I wish to reflect the gloom and doom of science-fiction films.
Speculation, however, is inevitable. The times are changing, and cinema,
as always, will change with it -- that is, if it finally reneges
speculation in favor of a veritable depiction of what is happening in
front of our faces.
