---
title: "Acceptance, Loud Conversations, and Everything In-Between: 'Sex Education' Review"
author: "Gabriele Sungailaite"
layout: post
date: 2020-04-28 02:40:48 +0000
tag: issue1
category: reviews
cover: /assets/img/issue1/gabriele/1
bgurl: /assets/img/issue1/gabriele/1
paddingtop: "35px"
---

<p id="first-paragraph">*Sex Education*, the buzzed-about Netflix series, recently released its
second season. For many, the show's main draw is its humour. For me, it
was an exposure of human vulnerability. Sex and sexuality make us
vulnerable and *Sex Education* perfectly captures that. While
incorporating romantic comedy tropes, the show strayed from its
'perfect' narrative and exposed sex beyond its romantic implications. It
unravelled multiplicities and withered from 'universal' flawless
romantic experiences, emphasising individual struggles, paths and
idiosyncrasies.</p>

The show helps to generate a healthy narrative and offers a breath of
fresh air in the deep-seated traditional perspectives around sex. Young
people and their sexual experiences sit at the heart of *Sex Education*,
tackling everything from fetishes, first times, masturbation, sexual
traumas, abortion, and figuring out one's body. In the midst of this,
the show tries to project the message that, when it comes to sex,
normativeness is not about similarity, but difference. Emphasises that
one should not try to follow or strive for their sex life to fit into
some normative paradigmatic narrative, it aims to embrace disparities
and encourage us to accept it by showing individual struggles and their
failures to conform to these traditional characteristics. It highlights
that nothing about sexual experience is 'universal', breaking the
fatigued stereotypical narrative generated by traditional romantic
comedies.

*Sex Education* also stresses that sex is a dangerous tool that can
cause significant harm. Even Otis' mother, and sex therapist, says that
'sex can ruin lives' and should be handled responsibly. The main
character Aimee has clearly been a victim of irresponsible sexual
behaviour and the show follows her story of dealing with the
psychological trauma she experienced as a result, which made her
re-define and rethink her sexuality. Through personal stories, the
series shows that sex education should not just constitute putting a
condom on a banana, lessons should extend in teaching young people about
things like consent and sexual assault, after all, pregnancies and STI's
are not the only consequences of sexual activity.

On top of this, *Sex Education* effectively explores the notion of
masculinity, the hardship of accepting your own body, alienation, the
myth of a 'normative' sexual narrative, and coming to terms with one's
sexual identity. It emphasises that sexuality is a journey; far from
anything static or universal.

While this assertion may feel obvious to some, *Sex Education* clearly
visualises these complexities and puts them into perspective. It expands
traditional sexual narratives and teaches powerful lessons about a
subject that is already hard enough to navigate, while traditional sex
education and romantic comedies miss a myriad of important points.
Hopefully, the show's success will inspire healthier sexual narratives,
louder and more comfortable conversations, while encouraging the
'Netflix generation' to ditch the stereotypes and accept that
normativeness lies in differences.
